once around Epapotus.
So, Eapotus, moon of Saturn. It's one of
the outer moons of Saturn, quite a
significant distance away from the
planet. Um, and it's named after one of
the Titans, an idea that was suggested
by John Herschel, son of Sir William
Hershel
and a famous astronomer in his own
right.
He came up with the idea of using the
names of the Titan gods for Saturn's
companions
because Saturn is the Roman name for the
Greek Kronos and Kronos was one of the
Titans himself. So many of the moons
have followed this convention.
Now, Epapotus was discovered by Givani
Cassini in 1671.
So, only about 70 years after the first
astronomical observations by Galileo.
And it was the second moon of Saturn to
be found after Titan.
Titan found in 1655.
And that makes it the sixth moon of a
planet to be known in human history.
Obviously there is our moon and the four
Galilean moons of Jupiter and then Titan
and then Yapotus making six. So uh quite
early on in the history of astronomy.
Now Cassini spotted Epapotus when it was
to the western side of Saturn and then a
few months later he couldn't find it.
12 months down the road, the Earth has
done a lap of the Sun. Saturn's moved a
little bit around its orbit. He's able
to do more observations. And again, he
finds Epapotus on the western elongation
away from Saturn, but cannot find it
later when it should have moved around
the planet. This is causing him some
difficulty in trying to work out the
orbit.
But in 1705, he finally manages to catch
Eapotus on the eastern side of the
planet Saturn.
Two magnitudes dimmer than when it was
to the west. Now, a magnitude is
fainter if it's larger. So, one
magnitude greater means a fainter object
by a factor in fact of just over two and
a half. The reason for that two and a
half is that five magnitudes corresponds
to a factor of 100 and therefore one
magnitude is the fifth root of 100 which
is 2.52 or thereabouts.
Um so two magnitudes represents a
significant drop in brightness factor of
over six and by then he had a better
telescope. So from 1671 to 1705,
30 years or so of technological
improvement to telescopes.
And it's interesting to uh note I I was
reading Sir Patrick Moore's ancient
book, The Amateur Astronomer the other
day, and it refers to this mystery as to
why Epotus was always brighter on the
west and dimmer on the east. And back in
the 1960s, an explanation for that
seemed uh to to have eluded people.
So we with all that information and the
ability to track the full orbit, we came
out with 79 days for one lap of the
planet further away than Titan and the
other inner moons of Saturn and somewhat
tilted.
So it's tipped over at a reasonable
angle. And that angle we have determined
is varying from between 5° and 21°
over a period of over 3,000 years. It's
uh wobbling backwards and forwards. So
somewhat unusual
and uh this is quite an interesting
point because it pertains to whether or
not we know where eapotus came from and
how it formed.
So, in terms of size,
1,469
kilometers in diameter, significantly
smaller than the Earth's moon. There you
can see the Earth, the Moon, and Yapotus
to scale. And that makes it the third
largest of Saturn's moons. So, Titan
comes first. It's one of the largest
moons in the solar system. Uh at one
stage it was thought to be the largest
but turns out that Ganymede of Jupiter
just pips it and the second one is Ria.
Um then you have aus and then the next
one down is Dioni
but it's a slightly curious shape. You
might describe it as an ellypoid or
perhaps an oblate spheroid. It's got a
bulging waistline and is squashed at the
poles is the best way to describe it so
that we don't get wrapped up in those
technical terms. But uh mostly
spherical. So it's a fairly round object
and most objects are fairly roundy. The
earth is uh slightly squashed at the
poles as well. So you can't hold that
against these things.
In terms of numbers, the radial
dimensions, this is the radius, not the
diameter. So 746 by 746 by 712. You can
see that slight polar flattening there.
And the entire surface area of the
planet has not really been imaged in
high resolution. We haven't had the best
view of it yet. So it's a target for
future exploration. In this one, the
shape is indicative of the state of
hydrostatic equilibrium. In other words,
the inward crush of gravity versus the
spin of the object u which makes them
bulge at the equator and the strength of
the material they're made of uh suggests
that uh it formed into a spherical shape
or an approximately spherical shape
because of the balance of these forces.
is the so-called hydrostatic
equilibrium, but that that was frozen in
place very early on, soon after the moon
formed. So, some objects seem to form
into those shapes over much longer
periods of time. And that suggests that
uh early on there was a reasonable
amount of internal heat in the moon and
that it managed to soften the material
to the point where it could rapidly
relax into the most gravity efficient
shape.
In terms of mass, we've seen the size,
but the mass technically 1.8 * 10 21 kg.
What does that really mean? Well, a 50th
of the mass of the Earth's moon. So, uh,
the Earth's moon is an 80th or so of the
mass of Earth. So, you can multiply
those together if you like. Um, but
really quite lightweight, especially for
its size. And the density therefore
works out at about 1 g per cubic cm
which is the standard
density for water or water ice around
about that level with only a very small
amount of more dense rocks and metals
present inside it. So this is mostly an
ice ball in all probability.
Now, it was actually Cassini that
realized what was happening to the moon
and why he could only see it on one side
of the planet. So, I'm surprised that
this wasn't referred to in Sir Patrick
Moore's books.
Many moons, including our own, are in
what's called tidal lock. They keep one
face of their surface pointing towards
the primary as they go round. Um this
generally happens when they are formed
in a plastic state in orbit, a
deformable state and tidal forces deform
the center of mass of the object such
that there's a heavy side and a light
side and it soon ends up to be most
efficient to have that offset of the
center of mass pointing towards the
primary at all times. That's what's
happened to our moon. And so he
suggested that maybe this moon was doing
the same thing and keeping one face
towards the the planet Saturn. And from
our line of sight, we would see
different faces
of the moonus
as it went round depending on whether it
was uh on the west or the east. So
imagine the earth being at the bottom of
this page looking up. When you have the
apertus on the left, you're seeing the
dark hemisphere. When it's on the right,
you're seeing the trailing white
hemisphere. Um, and when it's halfway,
you see half of each.
And so the brightness could be
substantially different if the two
hemispheres were, as in the diagram,
very dark and very light. Now,
explaining why that might be or indeed
confirming that that was the case took
um the uh visits of spacecraft to really
be able to see that. But he was right.
This is what's happening
when we look at Epotus. And these are
some of the first images from the
Voyager mission as it went to Saturn.
And we have the picture on the left
there, which almost looks like there's
some sort of eclipse going on, but
that's just the two hemispheres, bright
and dark. A fairly fuzzy picture of the
Apotus from 3 million kilometers back in
1980. And then that was Voyager 1.
Voyager 2 passed the Apotus more closely
um and got an image, the one on the
right, from 1 million kilometers, which
is a bit better, still a bit blurry and
still a reasonable distance away from
the moon. And it wasn't really until the
Cassini mission in 2006
that we were able to get very close and
get some much better images. Cassini's
closest approach was 1,200 kilometers.
So that's one diameter of the object
itself away from it um back in 2007. So
vastly better than being a thousand
times further away in terms of
brightness, resolution, and of course
the technology had moved on. The cameras
were much better as well. So now we've
got photographs like this of the surface
and it shows it's heavily cratered.
There's a very large crater 580
kilometers in diameter called Turgis.
That's the largest of the craters, but
there are many smaller ones. And as with
other solar system objects, there are
many more small ones. And the large ones
all seem to have small ones on top of
them. There are very few of the large
craters that haven't been struck. And
this suggests that the whatever was
bombarding the object was uh much more
prevalent with large objects in the past
and that nowadays only small things
remain in order to pepper the surface.
And it's also indicative of the fact
that this surface is very ancient. It's
accumulated so many craters without
further erasure of those craters through
geological activity, lava flows,
glacias, all those sorts of things that
erode and bury the craters again. Um, so
an old ancient surface pointing to a
very ancient moon indeed.
Now, here's a a picture with a little
bit of color in it. You can see we're
looking at the leading hemisphere that's
coming towards us uh or sorry, pointing
towards us when the moon is on the um uh
eastern side, quite dark in color, uh
reflecting just 5% of the light and a
slight reddish brown tinge to it. You
can see the big craters there and uh
that great big uh cliff around the edge
of Turgis, the huge 580 km crater. You
can also make out some chains of craters
uh some diagonal lines. So it's worth
having a little look at this photograph.
But the red brown color is typical of
many of the objects in the outer solar
system. And it's seems to be dark
material that has accumulated on the
surface of this moon due to impacts of
material
that's ejected from other moons by
cosmic impacts throwing pieces off that
then fall into the uh path of Apatus and
are swept up along the uh leading edge
as it goes around its orbit.
Here's a another picture with enhanced
color of part of the dark side and part
of the light side. So you can see the
the icy snowy color of part of the light
side spanning the poles and the uh far
leftand edge. And then the right hand
edge doesn't have that material. And
this is uh showing that much more red
brown color. And this is a composite
image. we've got uh better resolution
for some parts of the image than others.
You can kind of see that in the grid in
the center there that's been overlaid on
it. And so it seems likely that the
material that we're talking about has
been sourced elsewhere, possibly from
the moon Phoebe, which seems to show a
tenuous disc of material in orbit that
has been shown to then wash inwards and
land on Epotus and indeed on the next
moon in Hyperion as well. So we think
that's where this reddish brown material
containing a lot of tholins those uh
carbon uh hydrogen oxygen
organic compounds so common out in the
outer solar system. This includes things
that are polymers of hydrogen cyanide
all sorts of interesting chemicals. And
it's these CH N chemicals that can well
be the formation
um seeds for biochemical processes uh
given the right conditions. So it seems
that those chemical soup uh containing
those seeds is everywhere. Uh quite an
interesting discovery in its own right.
So that's another view. Again, you can
see the polar regions are bright and
it's the uh leading hemisphere there
that's dark over the equatorial and
tropical regions.
Now, the trailing hemisphere looks
completely different, covered in this
white frosting,
very bright, very shiny that's pointing
towards us when the moon is on the
western elongation and reflects a lot
more of the light. And because it's
reflecting a lot more of the light, this
side stays colder. And so this side is
cold and the far side is warmer. I
wouldn't say hot because they're both
pretty chilly, but this side is
definitely 30° or so cooler. And so
material that comes away is sublimed
into space from the surface is much more
likely to freeze out quicker on this
colder surface than it is on the warmer
dark surface. Just a little bit, just
enough that the material accumulates
here and you get a runaway process. So
this surface is cold because it's bright
and it's bright because it's cold. Um
whereas the other surface has got locked
into a dark state where material gets
sublimed off that and ends up falling
back and being cold trapped onto the
other hemisphere.
This is partly because with that
tidal lock and the 80 days or so that it
takes for eapotus to go round, it has 40
days of sun and then 40 days of dark on
each hemisphere as they go round. And so
the temperature has a chance to rise and
fall significantly during that time. And
the dark face in the middle of its day
when it's uh pointing towards the sun
can rise all the way up to 129 Kelvin.
That's minus 144 C. So still very cold
indeed. But the light face only makes it
to 113K
or minus 160. And of course it's colder
at the poles. And so this is why it's
the central equatorial region of the uh
dark face that is the only bit that
stays more or less frostfree. All the
frost migrates to the other poles with
this differential sublimation as it's
called. A positive feedback, a vicious
circle. Once it's cold, it gets colder
because it attracts more bright ice.
And this is an unwrapped color map of
the surface of Eapotus. I think this is
fantastic. This is uh from Dr. Paul
Shank in uh Houston. And uh you can see
the amazing detail that we've got. The
polar regions, not so much. They're a
little blurred, but we've got
photographs that have been composited
together to give us this sort of view of
the whole of the surface. Most of these
photographs of course coming from the uh
flybys by Cassini.
And so we've got a full rotation image
of Epotus. Let me see if I can make that
play for you. Here we go. So we have the
bright side and then really it's not the
whole of the far side that's dark, but
it's pretty close just because of those
polar regions. So, I quite like this
animation that shows what it looks like
because it takes 80 days to do one of
those rotations right around. And uh so
we have this interesting moon with
interesting chemistry and a lot of
chemical physics going on giving us this
uh two sides to the moon Aapotus.
But there's one more very interesting
feature which runs around the equator,
the equatorial ridge. And this oblique
photograph from Cassini shows it running
along there. You can see this linear
feature of these high mountains. They're
20 kilometers
above the average level of the surface.
first seen by Voyager,
but thought to be mountains, but with
later images from Cassini, we've been
able to show that these go pretty much
right around the equator, more prominent
in some places than others. Craters all
over the ridge as well. And so that
ridge has been there long enough to
accumulate them and is therefore quite
in itself ancient.
And uh you can see it running around the
uh central equator. You can see the
frosted material up at the top at the
pole there. So this is an equatorial
ridge. And it's quite a complicated
system. It's got three parallel ridges
in some places, some taller than others.
The bright regions don't seem to have as
much of a ridge or as many peaks and
they only go up to 10 kilometers above
the surface. The darker regions are
where you find the full ridge. And of
course, the reason for that may well be
that there is a terrific buildup of ice
on the far side. And when I say ice,
we're talking about water ice mixed with
uh ammonia ice, methane ice, carbon
monoxide, um, and possibly even frozen
nitrogen. So, we've got uh a complete
mixture and it may have built up over
the uh terrain and buried quite a lot of
the ridge. So, there there's another
photograph of it going right round. And
the question before us really is how
what what is going on? What's going on
with this ridge? How come it looks like
this and has this line going right
round? Now, it could be that this is
some sort of remnant of the original
shape of the moon. And when it was
originally formed around Saturn, it was
probably rotating on its axis much, much
faster than the 80 days that it now
takes. Probably in 17 hours only,
spinning very rapidly. That would
account for the equatorial bulge. Not
sure it quite accounts for this strange
ridge. That's uh I can't quite see that
one myself.
It's been suggested that it's ice welled
up from inside or other forms of
convective heating coming up at the
equator. Um and that the
interesting thing about that is that the
equator is the bit that's furthest from
the pole. furthest from the core if the
poles are squashed. And so this would be
the place where it would be furthest
from the heat source. And I can't quite
see that one either. Now there's been
some suggestion that the ridge formed
first and now you have this ridge and
this asymmetry to the body that has
dictated the spin axis. So this might
not have been the equator originally.
So, an interesting twist on the whole
idea. The one that I like the most is
the idea of a fossilized ring system.
And it's possible that Epotus once had a
whole cloud of debris around it and
indeed a submoon. So, Epapotus would
have been orbiting around Saturn, but
had a small moonlet orbiting round it
along with a cloud of debris. Perhaps
there had been a giant impact on Eapotus
and it had thrown off material that then
condensed to form rings and a a moon
around it. Much as we think the moon was
born around the earth by the impact of a
giant planet um or not a giant planet
another planet called Thea. So perhaps
that was the case. And if that was the
case, then the tidal effect of having a
largeish moon orbiting around would be
to possibly bring the ring material down
to ground level. It would cause it to
spiral in in an exchange of energy
involving uh the tidal disruption,
perhaps spiraling the moon away and
making the ring material spiral spiral
in and all land down around the equator
around which of course the ring was
orbiting. And so that's quite possible,
but there's no moonlet there now. So
maybe that exchange of momentum went on
to the point where the moon other
moonlet escaped um and was disrupted by
the gravity of Saturn and the other
moons away from the Apatus um and uh
either joined the other moons or was
otherwise lost perhaps colliding with
something else or diving into Saturn. We
don't know. But I do like this idea uh
of a fossilized ring system on the
surface there. Um it's not of course uh
what some people have suggested jokingly
that it's two halves of a coconut joined
together. I think that's a Montipython
and the Holy Grail reference. Um but it
did make me laugh.
Now this all points back to the ideas
about the formation of eapotus itself
and it seems most likely that it co-
accreted around Saturn when Saturn
formed. So very much a primordial moon
that uh came together
as Saturn was forming rather than being
formed later. And as such it would have
picked up a lot of the initial load out
of radioisotopes
such as aluminium 26 from the solar
nebula and that would have been able to
create the heating internally to melt
the body of the moon and allow it to
relax into the shape. Uh but I don't
think it accounts for the equatorial
ridge. I say I think that's the
fossilized moon. Some people have
suggested that it could be a later
formation date, much much later, and
that that was the result of a giant
collision of an earlier generation of
Saturnian moons, and that the new moons
that we see today are all only about 100
million years old. So, that's a huge
difference and two possible ideas. And I
think more study is called for to try to
figure out exactly what went on here and
uh how come we have this strange moon.
So thanks very much for listening and
that was once around Epotus.